           Instructions for Using the Microsoft Word
                  Proceedings Paper Template

1      Working with the Document Template

1.1    General Information
The template, splnproc2510.docm, has been designed for authors preparing a paper to
be published in one of Springer’s proceedings series. The template supports Word
2010 and newer. As Word for Mac 2016 does not support all features provided in recent
Word for Windows versions, a special template version splnproc2510_mac.docm is
provided for Mac users.
   Predefined style formats are available for all the necessary structures to be included
in the manuscript, and these formats can be quickly accessed using a custom ribbon
tab provided with the template.
   For a detailed description of how to prepare your text, illustrations, and references,
see the Author Guidelines for the Preparation of Contributions to Springer Computer
Science Proceedings.

1.2    How to Style Your Paper
If you have not yet started to write your paper, simply open the document
splnproc2510.docm and overwrite its sample contents with your data. Use the buttons
of the template’s custom ribbon to format additional elements.
   If you use copy & paste to transfer content from another document to the template,
please note that the original formatting of the pasted text will usually be retained. It
will not be automatically adjusted to the template’s predefined styles. In this case
you should select the pasted paragraphs and use the built-in macros to format them
according to the Springer standard.
   Finally save your document in the docx format, i.e., without macros, and name the
document with your name and a short form of the title (e.g., Smith_TitleOfPaper.docx).

                   On no account should docm files be submitted.
                  They are not compatible with Springer’s systems.

1.3    Activate the Macros
The activation of the template’s custom ribbon and macros depends on the security
settings on your individual system. If you encounter problems in activating the macros,
please check https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/office/enable-or-disable-macros-in-
microsoft-365-files-12b036fd-d140-4e74-b45e-16fed1a7e5c6 or the documentation of
the Microsoft Word version you are using.
2        Using the Microsoft Word Proceedings Paper Template


2      What the Ribbon’s Commands Do

The ‘Springer Proceedings Macros’ ribbon mainly consists of buttons for the available
style elements in the template. All commands are applied to the highlighted text. If no
text is highlighted, the selected style will be assigned to the paragraph that currently
has the cursor in it.
    We recommend to first enter your text and then click the required button. For exam-
ple, if you have just typed your affiliation and you are going to continue with writing
your abstract, do not click ‘Abstract’ before having started a new paragraph. Other-
wise the abstract format will be applied to the address information, where the cursor is
still positioned.
    The descriptions below show you how the ribbon buttons work in detail.




                   Fig. 1. Custom ribbon ‘Springer Proceedings Macros’


2.1    How to Format the Header of Your Paper

Button            Effect                   Description
                  Formats the               This button does not work if more than one
                  contribution title         paragraph is selected.
                                            If a subtitle follows the title, the space after
                                             the paragraph is adjusted automatically.
                  Formats a                 This button does not work if more than one
                  contribution subtitle      paragraph is selected.
                                            The spacing between the title and the subtitle
                                             is adjusted automatically.
                  Formats the               This button does not work if more than one
                  authors’ names             paragraph is selected.


                  Formats ORCID ids         The current text selection is formatted as
                                             superscript.
                                            This button also checks for the correct syntax
                                             of the ORCID id ‘[0000-1111-2222-3333]’.
                                            Please note that ORCID ids will not be
                                             printed. In the eBook version, they will be
                                             replaced by a symbol that is hyperlinked to
                                             the related ORCID profile.
                         Using the Microsoft Word Proceedings Paper Template                 3


              Formats affiliation and       This button sets the paragraph format for any
              address information            affiliation information including e-mail ad-
                                             dresses and URLs.
                                            The font of e-mail addresses and URLs can
                                             be adjusted by using the ‘Email/URL’ button.
              Formats e-mail addresses  This button changes the font of the current
              and URLs                   text selection to a typewriter font.
                                        If no text is selected, the word next to the
                                         current cursor position is formatted with the
                                         typewriter font.
              Formats the abstract          In addition to applying the appropriate para-
                                             graph format, the word ‘Abstract’ is added at
                                             the beginning of the first paragraph.

              Formats the keywords          This button does not work if more than one
                                             paragraph is selected.
                                            The word ‘Keywords’ is added at the begin-
                                             ning of the paragraph if not yet present.


2.2   How to Format Headings

Button        Effect                       Description
              Formats a level 1 heading  If you want to create a heading without a
              (numbered section           number, e.g., ‘References’, simply place the
              heading)                    cursor at the beginning of the text and press
                                          the backspace key [←].
              Formats a level 2 heading  If you want to create a heading without a
              (numbered subsection        number, simply place the cursor at the be-
              heading)                    ginning of the text and press the backspace
                                          key [←].
              Formats a level 3 heading  If applied to selected text:
              (bold run-in heading)       The selection is formatted as bold run-in
                                          heading.
                                         If applied to a paragraph:
                                          The first sentence, i.e., up to the first period, is
                                          formatted in bold font style as run-in heading.
                                         If applied to an empty paragraph:
                                          Bold font style is applied to any text then
                                          typed in. Once you have finished the heading,
                                          you should press the ‘Normal Text’ button to
                                          reset the character style to normal text again.
4        Using the Microsoft Word Proceedings Paper Template


Button           Effect                       Description
                 Formats a level 4 heading  If applied to selected text:
                 (italic run-in heading)     The selection is formatted as italic run-in
                                             heading.
                                            If applied to a paragraph:
                                             The first sentence, i.e., up to the first period, is
                                             formatted in italic font style as run-in heading.
                                            If applied to an empty paragraph:
                                             Italic font style is applied to any text then
                                             typed in. Once you have finished the heading,
                                             you should press the ‘Normal Text’ button to
                                             reset the character style to normal text again.


2.3   How to Create Lists

Button           Effect                      Description
                 Creates an unnumbered        This button applies a complete itemization
                 list with bullet items/dash   scheme with multiple levels.
                 items on the 1st level       The only difference between the two buttons
                                               is that one starts with bullets and continues
                                               with dashes on the 2nd level, while the other
                                               starts with dashes and continues with bullets
                                               on the 2nd level.
                                              Use the ‘list level’ buttons to set the levels
                                               and indents for nested lists.
                                              Vertical space will only be added before and
                                               after a list. The spacing is adjusted automati-
                                               cally if you select a complete block of elements
                                               before clicking on one of the list buttons.
                 Creates a numbered list      Contains a numbering scheme with multiple
                 with Arabic numerals on       levels. The 2nd level uses alphabetic charac-
                 its 1st level                 ters, the 3rd level uses lower case Roman
                                               numerals, and so on.
                                              Use the ‘list level’ buttons to set the levels
                                               and indents of nested lists.
                                              Vertical space will only be added before and
                                               after a list. The spacing is adjusted automati-
                                               cally if you select a complete block of elements
                                               before clicking on one of the list buttons.
                 Restarts or continues a      Only works for numbered lists.
                 numbered list                If more than one paragraph is selected, the
                                               button only applies to the first paragraph.
                         Using the Microsoft Word Proceedings Paper Template                  5


              Increases the level of an    Only works for text that has already been
              existing numbered or          formatted with one of the ‘Bullet item,’ ‘Dash
              unnumbered list               item,’ or ‘Num item’ buttons before.
              (increases the               Please only use this button with nested lists.
              indentation)                 If you want to create, e.g., a numbered list
                                            with bulleted subitems, you should first select
                                            all items and click on the ‘Num item’ button.
                                            Then select the subitems and hit the ‘Dash
                                            item’ button. Finally, apply ‘List level up’ to
                                            the subitems. The indentation will be shifted
                                            to the next level and the dashes will be con-
                                            verted to bullets since bullets represent the
                                            second level of the ‘Dash item’ list template.
              Decreases the level of an    Only works for text that has already been
              existing numbered or          formatted with one of the ‘Bullet item,’ ‘Dash
              unnumbered list               item,’ or ‘Num item’ buttons and has been
              (decreases the                shifted to a higher level.
              indentation)                 Please only use this button with nested lists.


2.4   How to Format Text and Paragraphs

Button        Effect                      Description
              Formats normal text          Depending on the current selection, this but-
                                            ton either applies the default font or it applies
                                            the default paragraph format:
                                           If an entire paragraph (or nothing) is selected,
                                            and the underlying format is different from the
                                            standard paragraph format: The standard
                                            paragraph format is applied to the selection.
                                           If an entire paragraph (or nothing) is selected,
                                            and the underlying format is already the
                                            standard paragraph format: The standard
                                            character style is applied to the selection.
                                           If text is selected that does not follow the
                                            default character style: The standard charac-
                                            ter style is applied to the selection.
                                           If text is selected that already follows the
                                            default character style: The standard para-
                                            graph format is applied to the selection.
                                           If you want to apply the standard paragraph
                                            format and remove a nonstandard character
                                            style, simply click on the button twice.
                                           Please note that standard paragraphs are not
                                            indented after headings, captions, lists, etc., but
                                            they have a first-line indent in all other cases.
6        Using the Microsoft Word Proceedings Paper Template


Button           Effect                     Description
                 Inserts vertical space      This button adds 6 pt (2.1 mm) of vertical
                                              space before the selected paragraph.
                 Removes space before        This button clears any vertical space before
                 and after the current        and after the selected text.
                 selection                   If space remains after the button has been
                                              clicked, please check the preceding and/or the
                                              following paragraphs for their settings.
                 Inserts a footnote          This button inserts a footnote at the current
                                              cursor position.
                                             For remarks to the contribution title, the
                                              footnote character is automatically changed
                                              to a symbol (instead of a number).
                 Formats a reference entry  This command helps you format numbered
                                             reference lists.
                                            The hanging indent of the reference items is
                                             automatically adjusted based on the total
                                             number of references.
                                            If you prefer unnumbered references, simply
                                             place the cursor at the beginning of each ref-
                                             erence item and press the backspace key [←]
                                             to remove the number.


2.5   How to Format Special Elements of Your Paper

Button              Effect                    Description
                    Inserts an image from an  The image is always placed in an empty
                    external file              paragraph.
                                              If the cursor is not in an empty paragraph
                                               when clicking on this button, a new para-
                                               graph is added after the current one, and
                                               the image is inserted there.
                    Formats a figure caption  In addition to applying the appropriate
                                               paragraph format, ‘Fig. [X]’ is added at
                                               the beginning of the paragraph ([X] is an
                                               automatic counter that is updated whenev-
                                               er the document is opened).
                                              This macro does not work if more than
                                               one paragraph is selected.
                                              If the caption runs over multiple lines the
                                               paragraph alignment is automatically
                                               switched to justified.
                           Using the Microsoft Word Proceedings Paper Template                   7


Button            Effect                       Description
                  Formats a table caption       In addition to applying the appropriate
                                                 paragraph format, ‘Table [X]’ is added at
                                                 the beginning of the paragraph ([X] is an
                                                 automatic counter that is updated whenev-
                                                 er the document is opened).
                                                This macro does not work if more than
                                                 one paragraph is selected.
                                                If the caption runs over multiple lines, the
                                                 paragraph alignment is automatically
                                                 switched to justified.
                  Formats a displayed           Displayed equations are always centered
                  equation                       between the text margins.
                                                If you want to align the equal sign in mul-
                                                 tiline displays, please use the alignment
                                                 feature of the equation editor.
                  Adds an equation num-         This button only works if the selected
                  ber to a displayed equa-       paragraph was formatted with the ‘Equa-
                  tion                           tion’ button before.
                                                The automatic counter that is inserted in
                                                 the right margin is updated whenever the
                                                 document is opened.
                  Formats program list-         Please note that the paragraph format
                  ings and command               includes tabulators every 4 mm that can
                  sequences                      help you adjust the indentation of code
                                                 blocks.



2.6   How to Restore the Template Styles

Button         Effect                        Description
               Checks the template and        If the original template styles were altered or
               restores all predefined         are not available anymore, you can restore
               styles                          them by clicking this button. Individual for-
                                               matting will be retained.
                                              You should also use this button if clicking
                                               one of the formatting buttons in the ribbon
                                               causes an error.
8        Using the Microsoft Word Proceedings Paper Template


3      Frequently Asked Questions
I do not see the ‘Springer Proceedings Macros’ ribbon – what’s the problem?
If you do not see the ‘Springer Proceedings Macros’ ribbon described in this document,
it has probably been deactivated by your current macro security settings.
    To read more about the macro security in Microsoft Office and how they are con-
figured, please check the information available at https://support.microsoft.com/en-
us/office/enable-or-disable-macros-in-microsoft-365-files-12b036fd-d140-4e74-b45e-
16fed1a7e5c6.

Clicking a formatting button on the ‘Springer Proceedings Macros’ ribbon throws
an error.
The typical reason for this issue is that styles associated with the formatting buttons
are not available. You can automatically restore them by clicking the “restore styles”
button (see 2.6).

I have copied text from another document into the template, but it is not or not
fully adjusted to the Springer standard.
There are three possible reasons: First, only formatting styles that already existed in
your original document can be updated by the template. Second, only if those styles
were used in your original document, adjusting them can have a visible effect. Third,
please consider that individual modifications of certain styles are usually retained,
even if the original styles are overwritten by a new template. In all three cases, you
should simply re-apply the appropriate styles using the formatting button of the
‘Springer Proceedings Macros’ ribbon.

I have formatted a text element by clicking the respective button, but some of
the selected style’s properties were obviously not applied.
There might be a conflict between the underlying paragraph style and some individual
character and paragraph formatting. Most buttons in the ribbon change the underlying
style only and do not generally adjust individual formatting that might be present in
the selected text. Solution: First reset the text formatting by clicking the ‘Normal
Text’ button twice, then apply the desired style.

The automatic numbering of sections and subsections seems to be corrupted.
Please simply apply the H1 and H2 formats to the affected section headings or sub-
section headings once again to correct the numbering.
                          Using the Microsoft Word Proceedings Paper Template      9


I would like to use special characters in my text – how should I insert them?
Reformatting of running text, in which special characters such as Greek letters have
been entered via the keyboard, can cause these characters to disappear. In order to
avoid this problem, always insert special characters to your document from the menu
point Insert→Symbol. In the Symbol dialog box, select the required character.

                                                                    October 15, 2025
